content/blog/2020/06/25/fixing-images-in-gatsby-rss-feeds/index.md, before:

---
title: "Fixing images in Gatsby RSS Feeds"
date: "2020-06-25T14:40:00.000Z"
tags: ["gatsby"]
---

I've been using Gatsby for my blog for some time now. It's been great, especially when you follow [the easy way to add & customize an RSS feed](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/adding-an-rss-feed/#customizing-the-rss-feed-plugin) with the `gatsby-plugin-feed` plugin.

I use the RSS feed to trigger an automatic email newsletter being sent by ConvertKit. Things are configured so the entire blog post content is sent in the email, so subscribers don't even need to visit my website.

Overall, it works pretty great, however, I had the problem with images not showing within emails. This is because the RSS feed references content in the same way the Gatsby frontend renders it, with relative paths:

![Gatsby image with relative path](gatsby-image-with-relative-path.png)

This works fine for the frontend of the site in both develop and production modes because the current site URL is used as the base path when the request for an image occurs. However, when reading within an email client, it doesn't render the image since the base path either doesn't exist or falls back to `http://localhost`.

To resolve this, we need to update the RSS feed serializer within the `gatsby-config.js` file. The example from the `gatsby-plugin-feed` plugin presents this as the base value to work with when customizing RSS feeds:

```js
...
feeds: [
  {
    serialize: ({ query: { site, allMarkdownRemark } }) => {
      return allMarkdownRemark.edges.map(edge => {
        return Object.assign({}, edge.node.frontmatter, {
          description: edge.node.excerpt,
          date: edge.node.frontmatter.date,
          url: site.siteMetadata.siteUrl + edge.node.fields.slug,
          // highlight-next-line
          custom_elements: [{ "content:encoded": edge.node.html }],
        })
      })
    },
...
```

The value responsible for rendering HTML content is added by the `custom_elements` object property with the `"content:encoded"` property, which gets the value from `edge.node.html`.

We'll need to look at this `edge.node.html` property. Every path for an image in Gatsby seems to use a `/static/` prefix. We can use `.replace` to prepend the value of `site.siteMetadata.siteUrl` to the path to make it into an absolute path. This makes the above code become:

```js
...
feeds: [
  {
    serialize: ({ query: { site, allMarkdownRemark } }) => {
      return allMarkdownRemark.edges.map(edge => {
        return Object.assign({}, edge.node.frontmatter, {
          description: edge.node.excerpt,
          date: edge.node.frontmatter.date,
          url: site.siteMetadata.siteUrl + edge.node.fields.slug,
          // highlight-start
          custom_elements: [
            {
              "content:encoded": edge.node.html.replace(
                '/static/',
                `${site.siteMetadata.siteUrl}/static/`
              ),
            },
          ],
          //highlight-end
        })
      })
    },
...
```

Luckily this is a really easy solution to implement, and this post should now properly email to my subscribers with the images rendered inline within their email client.

Commit message:

Fix for last blog post (again!)

content/blog/2020/06/25/fixing-images-in-gatsby-rss-feeds/index.md, after:

---
title: "Fixing images in Gatsby RSS Feeds"
date: "2020-06-25T14:40:00.000Z"
tags: ["gatsby"]
---

I've been using Gatsby for my blog for some time now. It's been great, especially when you follow [the easy way to add & customize an RSS feed](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/docs/adding-an-rss-feed/#customizing-the-rss-feed-plugin) with the `gatsby-plugin-feed` plugin.

I use the RSS feed to trigger an automatic email newsletter being sent by ConvertKit. Things are configured so the entire blog post content is sent in the email, so subscribers don't even need to visit my website.

Overall, it works pretty great, however, I had the problem with images not showing within emails. This is because the RSS feed references content in the same way the Gatsby frontend renders it, with relative paths:

![Gatsby image with relative path](gatsby-image-with-relative-path.png)

This works fine for the frontend of the site in both develop and production modes because the current site URL is used as the base path when the request for an image occurs. However, when reading within an email client, it doesn't render the image since the base path either doesn't exist or falls back to `http://localhost`.

To resolve this, we need to update the RSS feed serializer within the `gatsby-config.js` file. The example from the `gatsby-plugin-feed` plugin presents this as the base value to work with when customizing RSS feeds:

```js
...
feeds: [
  {
    serialize: ({ query: { site, allMarkdownRemark } }) => {
      return allMarkdownRemark.edges.map(edge => {
        return Object.assign({}, edge.node.frontmatter, {
          description: edge.node.excerpt,
          date: edge.node.frontmatter.date,
          url: site.siteMetadata.siteUrl + edge.node.fields.slug,
          // highlight-next-line
          custom_elements: [{ "content:encoded": edge.node.html }],
        })
      })
    },
...
```

The value responsible for rendering HTML content is added by the `custom_elements` object property with the `"content:encoded"` property, which gets the value from `edge.node.html`.

We'll need to modify this `edge.node.html` property. Every path for an image in Gatsby seems to use a `/static/` prefix, either prefixed with a `"` for `src` attributes or a space for `srcset` atttributes. Since we want both scenarios to be replaced, and not other matches such as `/static/` references within this specific blog post, we can use `.replace()` with a regular expression lookbehind assertion to search only for exact matches.

The regular expression `/(?<=\"|\s)\/static\//g,` matches `/static/` only if it is prefixed with a `"` or a space. The positive lookbehind assertion (denoted with `?<=`) ensures that this aspect of the regular expression match is not replaced. And finally, the `/g` flag at the end ensures a global replace. We'll then prepend the value of `site.siteMetadata.siteUrl` to `/static/` in order to make references into absolute paths.

This makes the above code become:

```js
...
feeds: [
  {
    serialize: ({ query: { site, allMarkdownRemark } }) => {
      return allMarkdownRemark.edges.map(edge => {
        return Object.assign({}, edge.node.frontmatter, {
          description: edge.node.excerpt,
          date: edge.node.frontmatter.date,
          url: site.siteMetadata.siteUrl + edge.node.fields.slug,
          // highlight-start
          custom_elements: [
            {
              "content:encoded": edge.node.html.replace(
                /(?<=\"|\s)\/static\//g,
                `${site.siteMetadata.siteUrl}\/static\/`
              ),
            },
          ],
          //highlight-end
        })
      })
    },
...
```

Luckily this is a really easy solution to implement, and this post should now properly email to my subscribers with the images rendered inline within their email client.
